Great duke of Lancaster,
I come to thee from plumeplucked Richard,
who with willing souladopts thee heir,
and his high scepteryields
to the possession of thyroyal hand.
Ascend his throne,descending now from him,
and long live Henry,fourth of that name.
Long live Henry, fourth ofthat name.
In God's name, I'll ascendthe regal throne.
Marry.
God forbid.
Worst in this royalpresence may I speak,
yet best beseeming me tospeak the truth.
Would God that any in thisnoble presence
were enough noble to beupright judge of nobleRichard,
then true noblesse would
learn him forbearance fromso foul a wrong.
What subject can givesentence on his king?
And who stands here thatis not Richard's subject?
Thieves are not judged butthey are by to hear,
although apparent guilt beseen in them.
And shall the figure ofGod's majesty,
his captain, steward,deputy elect,
anointed, crowned, plantedmany years,
be judged by subject andinferior breath,
and he himself notpresent?
Oh, forfend it, God,
that in a Christianclimate
souls refined should showso heinous, black, obscenea deed.
Traitor!
I speak to subjects, and asubject speaks,
stirred up by God, thusboldly for his king.
My lord of Hereford here,whom you call king,
is a foul traitor to proudHereford's king.
And if you crown him, letme prophesy.
The blood of English shallmanure the ground
and future ages groan forthis foul act.
Peace shall go sleep withTurks and infidels.
And in this seat of peace,
tumultuous wars shall kinwith kin and kind withkind confound.
Disorder, horror, fear, andmutiny shall here inhabit,
and this land be called
the field of Golgotha anddead men's skulls.
Oh, if you raise thishouse against this house,
it will the woefullestdivision prove
that ever fell upon thiscursed earth.
Prevent it, resist it, letit not be so,
lest child, child's children,cry against you woe.
Well have you argued, sir,
and, for your pains, ofcapital treason we arrestyou here.
My lord of Westminster,
be it your charge to keep himsafely till his day of trial.
May it please you, lords,to grant the commons' suit.
Aye!
Fetch hither Richard, thatin common view he maysurrender,
so we shall proceedwithout suspicion.
I will be his conduct.
Alack, why am I sent forto a king
before I have shook offthe regal thoughts
wherewith I reigned?
I hardly yet have learned
to insinuate, flatter,bow, and bend my knee.
Give sorrow leave awhileto tutor me to thissubmission.
Yet I well remember thefavors of these men.
Were they not mine?
Did they not sometime cry,"all hail" to me?
So Judas did to Christ.
But he, in 12, found truthin all but 1.
I, in 12,000, none.
God save the king!
Will no man say amen?
Am I both priest andclerk?
Well, then, amen.
God save the king.
Although I be not he,
and yet, amen, if heavendo think him me.
To do what service am Isent for hither?
To do that office of thineown goodwill
which tired majesty didmake thee offer:
the resignation of thystate and crown to HenryBolingbroke.
Give me the crown.
Here, cousin, seize thecrown.
Here, cousin.
On this side my hand, andon that side yours.
Now is this golden crownlike a deep well
that owes two buckets,filling one another,
the emptier ever dancingin the air,
the other down, unseen,and full of water.
That bucket down and fullof tears am I,
drinking my griefs whilstyou mount up on high.
I thought you had beenwilling to resign.
My crown I am, but stillmy griefs are mine.
You may my glories and mystate depose,
but not my griefs.
Still am I king of those.
Part of your cares yougive me with your crown.
Your cares set up do notpluck my cares down.
My care is loss of care,by old care done.
Your care is gain of care,by new care won.
The cares I give I have,though given away.
They tend the crown, yetstill with me they stay.
Are you contented toresign the crown?
Aye.
No!
No.
Aye, for I must nothingbe.
Therefore no, no, for Iresign to thee.
Now, mark me, how I willundo myself.
I give this heavy weightfrom off my head
and this unwieldy scepterfrom my hand,
the pride of kingly swayfrom out my heart.
With mine own tears I washaway my balm.
With mine own hands I giveaway my crown.
With mine own tongue denymy sacred state.
With mine own breathrelease all duty's oaths.
All pomp and majesty I doforswear.
My manors, rents, revenuesI forego.
My acts, decrees, andstatutes I deny.
God pardon all oaths thatare broke to me.
God keep all vows unbrokeare made to thee.
Make me that nothing havewith nothing grieved,
and thou with all pleasedthat hast all achieved.
Long mayst thou live inRichard's seat to sit,
and soon lie Richard in anearthly pit.
God save King Henry,unkinged Richard says,
and send him many years ofsunshine days.
What more remains?
No more, but that you read
these accusations andthese grievous crimes
committed by your personand your followers
against the state andprofit of this land,
that, by confessing them,
the souls of men may deemthat you are worthilydeposed.
Must I do so?
And must I ravel out myweaved-up follies?
Gentle Northumberland, if thyoffences were upon record,
would it not shame thee inso fair a troop
to read a lecture of them?
If thou wouldst,
there shouldst thou findone heinous article,
containing the deposing ofa king
and cracking the strongwarrant of an oath,
marked with a blot, damnedin the book of heaven.
Nay, all of you that standand look upon me
whilst that my wretchednessdoth bait myself,
though some of you withPilate wash your hands,
showing an outward pity.
Yet you Pilates have heredelivered me to my sour cross,
and water cannot wash awayyour sin.
My lord, dispatch.
Read o'er these articles.
Mine eyes are full oftears.
I cannot see.
And yet salt water blindsthem not so much
but they can see a sort oftraitors here.
Nay, if I turn mine eyesupon myself,
I find myself a traitorwith the rest,
for I have given here mysoul's consent
to undeck the pompous bodyof a king,
made glory base andsovereignty a slave,
proud majesty a subject,state a peasant.
My lord--
No lord of thine, thouhaught, insulting man,
nor no man's lord.
I have no name, no title.
No, not that name wasgiven me at the font,
but 'tis usurped.
Alack the heavy day
that I have worn so manywinters out
and know not now what nameto call myself.
Oh, that I were a mockeryking of snow,
standing before the sun ofBolingbroke,
to melt myself away inwaterdrops.
Good king, great king, andyet not greatly good,
and if my word be sterlingyet in England,
let it command a mirrorhither straight,
that it may show me what aface I have
since it is bankrupt ofHis Majesty.
Go some of you and fetch alooking glass.
Read o'er this paper whilethe glass doth come.
Fiend, thou torment'st meere I come to hell.
Urge it no more, my lordNorthumberland.
The commons then will notbe satisfied.
They shall be satisfied.
I'll read enough when I dosee the very book indeed
where all my sins arewrit, and that's myself.
Give me the glass,
and therein will I read.
No deeper wrinkles yet?
Hath sorrow struck so manyblows upon this face of mine,
and made no deeper wounds?
Oh, flattering glass,
like to my followers inprosperity,
thou dost beguile me.
Was this face the face
that every day under hishousehold roof
did keep 10,000 men?
Was this the face that,like the sun, did makebeholders wink?
Is this the face whichfaced so many follies
that was at last outfacedby Bolingbroke?
A brittle glory shineth inthis face,
as brittle as the glory isthe face.
For there it lies, crackedin a hundred shivers.
Mark, silent king, themoral of this sport.
How soon my sorrow hathdestroyed my face.
The shadow of your sorrowhath destroyed
the shadow of your face.
Say that again.
The shadow of my sorrow.
Ha!
Let's see.
'Tis very true.
My grief lies all within.
And these external mannersof lament
are merely shadows to theunseen grief
that swells with silencein the tortured soul.
There lies the substance,
and I thank thee, king,for thy great bounty
that not only givest mecause to wail
but teachest me the wayhow to lament the cause.
I'll beg one boon, andthen be gone and troubleyou no more.
Shall I obtain it?
Name it, fair cousin.
Fair cousin?
I am greater than a king,
for when I was a king,
my flatterers were thenbut subjects.
Being now a subject, I havea king here to myflatterer.
Being so great, I have noneed to beg.
Yet ask.
And shall I have?
You shall.
Then give me leave to go.
Whither?
Whither you will, so Iwere from your sights.
Go, some of you convey himto the tower.
Oh, good.
Convey?
Conveyers are you all
that rise thus nimbly by atrue king's fall.
On Wednesday next, wesolemnly set down ourcoronation.
Lords, prepare yourselves.
God save the king!
A woeful pageant have wehere beheld.
The woe's to come.
The children yet unborn
shall feel this day assharp to them as thorn.
You holy clergymen, isthere no plot
to rid the realm of thispernicious blot?
This way the king willcome.
This is the way to JuliusCaesar's ill-erected tower,
to whose flint bosom mycondemned lord
is doomed a prisoner byproud Bolingbroke.
Here let us rest, if thisrebellious earth
have any resting for hertrue king's queen.
But soft, but see, orrather do not see,
my fair rose wither.
Yet look up, behold,
that you in pity maydissolve to dew
and wash him fresh againwith true love tears.
Ah, thou, the model whereold Troy did stand,
thou map of honor, thouKing Richard's tomb,
and not King Richard.
Thou most beauteous inn,
why should hard-favoredgrief be lodged in thee,
when triumph is become analehouse guest?
Join not with grief, fairwoman.
Do not so, to make my endtoo sudden.
Learn, good soul,
to think our former statea happy dream,
from which awaked,
the truth of what we areshows us but this.
I am sworn brother, sweet,to grim necessity,
and he and I will keep aleague till death.
Hie thee to France andcloister thee in somereligious house.
Our holy lives must win anew world's crown,
which our profane hourshere have stricken down.
What, is my Richard bothin shape and mind
transformed and weakened?
Hath Bolingbroke deposedthine intellect?
Hath he been in thy heart?
The lion dying thrustethforth his paw
and wounds the earth, ifnothing else,
with rage to beo'erpower'd.
And wilt thou, pupil-like,
take the correctionmildly, kiss the rod,
and fawn on rage with basehumility,
which art a lion and theking of beasts?
King of beasts indeed.
If aught but beasts, Ihad still been a happyking of men.
Good sometimes queen, preparethee hence for France.
Think I am dead and thateven here thou takest,
as from my deathbed, thylast living leave.
In winter's tediousnights,
sit by the fire with goodold folks
and let them tell theetales of woeful ages longago betid.
And ere thou bid good night,to quit their griefs,
tell thou the lamentabletale of me
and send the hearersweeping to their beds.
For why, the senselessbrands will sympathize
the heavy accent of thymoving tongue
and in compassion weep thefire out.
And some will mourn inashes, some coal black,
for the deposing of arightful king.
My lord, the mind ofBolingbroke is changed.
You must to Pomfret, notunto the tower.
And, madam, there is orderta'en for you.
With all swift speed youmust away to France.
Northumberland, thouladder wherewithal
the mounting Bolingbrokeascends my throne,
the time shall not be manyhours of age
more than it is ere foulsin gathering head
shall break intocorruption.
Thou shalt think,
though he divide the realmand give thee half,
it is too little, helpinghim to all.
And he shall think thatthou
which know'st the way toplant unrightful kings
wilt know again, beingne'er so little urged,
another way to pluck himheadlong
from the usurped throne.
The love of wicked menconverts to fear,
that fear to hate,
and hate turns one or both
to worthy danger anddeserved death.
My guilt be on my head,and there an end.
Take leave and part, foryou must part forthwith.
Doubly divorced.
Bad men, you violate atwofold marriage,
'twixt my crown and me,
and then betwixt me and mymarried wife.
Let me unkiss the oath'twixt thee and me.
And yet not so, for with akiss 'twas made.
Part us, Northumberland--
I toward the north,
where shivering cold andsickness pines the clime.
My wife to France,
from whence, set forth inpomp,
she came adorned hitherlike sweet May,
sent back like Hallowmasor short'st of day.
And must we be divided?
Must we part?
Aye, hand from hand, mylove, and heart from heart.
Banish us both and sendthe king with me.
That were some love butlittle policy.
Then whither he goes,thither let me go.
So two, together weeping,make one woe.
Weep thou for me inFrance, I for thee here.
Better far off than near,be ne'er the near.
Go, count thy way withsighs.
I mine with groans.
So longest way shall havethe longest moans.
Twice for one step I'llgroan, the way being short,
and piece the way out witha heavy heart.
Come, come, in wooingsorrow let's be brief,
since, wedding it, thereis such length in grief.
One kiss shall stop ourmouths, and dumbly part.
Thus give I mine, and thustake I thy heart.
Give me mine own again.
'Twere no good part totake on me to keep andkill thy heart.
Now I have mine own again.
Be gone that I may striveto kill it with a groan.
We make woe wanton withthis fond delay.
Once more, adieu.
The rest let sorrow say.